---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/stop-trying-to-optimise-learning/"}
---

#writing/blog

There is more formal work on this, but it is probably best as a blog initially. 

Already written about a bit in [[Sources/@kittoPlacesInterveneComplex2024\|@kittoPlacesInterveneComplex2024]]

> [!important] Main idea
> Opinion piece on avoiding the adopted language of 'optimisation' around learning as it is unhelpful.
>
{ #main-idea}

> 
 
> [!abstract] Abstract
> Abstract here
>
{ #Abstract}


Key idea is that [[optimising-in-complex-systems-can-cause-failure\|optimising-in-complex-systems-can-cause-failure]], and [[learning-is-complex\|learning-is-complex]]. 
But Learning Analytics has inherited language and practices from other fields such as computer science. One such term is [[Optimising\|Optimising]], 

There are consequences, both in meaning making and in the mathematical apparatus, of inheriting these words and practices. 

Experts talking past each other? Epistemology. Maybe talk to Simon Knight? Is this about what counts as knowledge??

What about statistical significance?

"Ground truth" - another term borrowed from somewhere else. Now "grounding" means something VERY different in the context of prepping datasets for LLMs

Other words - theory, learning???

RCT - always one treatment, one outcome. Not how complex systems work.

[[words come with baggage\|words come with baggage]], which might be epistemological, or even mathematical (optimise), or cultural (RCT)

[@borsboomTheoryConstructionMethodology2021]

[[Sources/@pearlBookWhyNew2018\|@pearlBookWhyNew2018]] said stuff


Should we simply stop 'evidence based education?' - https://blog.aare.edu.au/the-problem-with-using-scientific-evidence-in-education-why-teachers-should-stop-trying-to-be-more-like-doctors/

#todo/important reframe this in terms of evidence based education. Think about long term or hard to measure effects, that get hidden from the evidence base. What to do? Think about how causal models might help reframe uncertainty in meta-analysis 

# What is in the evidence base? 

Stuff that:
- Works on the "middle" or "average", for things;
- We can measure;
- On people we can study



# Planning

## Target Journal
Position peace for LAK or JLA? #todo look at references. Might get too much resistance there. 

Is this just education? PNAS or similar? 

Or just a blog?


## Contribution


## Steps

# Key Literature

Kirsty and Andrew's LAK paper, Places to Intervene in Complex Learning Systems #getref

Audrey Watters - thinking machines

- A broken paradigm? What education needs to learn from education-based medicine - - [https://doi-org.ezproxy.lib.uts.edu.au/10.1080/02680939.2019.1578902](https://doi-org.ezproxy.lib.uts.edu.au/10.1080/02680939.2019.1578902)
- Seven reasons to question the hegemony of visible learning - https://www-tandfonline-com.ezproxy.lib.uts.edu.au/doi/full/10.1080/01596306.2018.1480474

# Latex-backup

 This is file `sample-manuscript.tex',


 
 
 
 with new filenames distinct from sample-manuscript.tex.
 For distribution of the original source see the terms
 
 original source files, as listed above, are part of the
 in the same archive or directory.)
 Commands for TeXCount
%TC:macro \cite [option:text,text]
%TC:macro \citep [option:text,text]
%TC:macro \citet [option:text,text]
%TC:envir table 0 1
%TC:envir table* 0 1
%TC:envir tabular [ignore] word
%TC:envir displaymath 0 word
%TC:envir math 0 word
%TC:envir comment 0 0

 Fonts used in the template cannot be substituted; margin 

 Rights management information.  This information is sent to you
 values in them; it is your responsibility as an author to replace
 complete the rights form.
\setcopyright{acmcopyright}
\copyrightyear{2024}
\acmYear{2024}
\acmDOI{XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX}


 Use this when submitting an article to a sponsored event. You'll
 of the event, and this ID should be used as the parameter to this command.

 files in BibTeX format.
 You can then either use BibTeX with the ACM-Reference-Format style,
 support for advanced citation of software artefact from the

 the biblatex styles.

 references.  The command \citestyle{authoryear} switches to the

 sponsored by ACM SIGGRAPH, you must use the "author year" style of
 Uncommenting
\citestyle{acmauthoryear}

 end of the preamble, start of the body of the document source.
\begin{document}

 The "title" command has an optional parameter,

 the authors and their affiliations.
 "authornote" and "authornotemark" commands

 headers. Often, this list is too long, and will overlap
 the author to define a more concise list

 article.
\begin{abstract}
  Abstract
\end{abstract}

 The code below is generated by the tool at http://dl.acm.org/ccs.cfm.

\begin{CCSXML}
<ccs2012>
 <concept>
  <concept_id>00000000.0000000.0000000</concept_id>
  <concept_desc>Do Not Use This Code, Generate the Correct Terms for Your Paper</concept_desc>
  <concept_significance>500</concept_significance>
 </concept>
 <concept>
  <concept_id>00000000.00000000.00000000</concept_id>
  <concept_desc>Do Not Use This Code, Generate the Correct Terms for Your Paper</concept_desc>
  <concept_significance>300</concept_significance>
 </concept>
 <concept>
  <concept_id>00000000.00000000.00000000</concept_id>
  <concept_desc>Do Not Use This Code, Generate the Correct Terms for Your Paper</concept_desc>
  <concept_significance>100</concept_significance>
 </concept>
 <concept>
  <concept_id>00000000.00000000.00000000</concept_id>
  <concept_desc>Do Not Use This Code, Generate the Correct Terms for Your Paper</concept_desc>
  <concept_significance>100</concept_significance>
 </concept>
</ccs2012>
\end{CCSXML}

\ccsdesc[500]{Do Not Use This Code~Generate the Correct Terms for Your Paper}
\ccsdesc[300]{Do Not Use This Code~Generate the Correct Terms for Your Paper}
\ccsdesc{Do Not Use This Code~Generate the Correct Terms for Your Paper}
\ccsdesc[100]{Do Not Use This Code~Generate the Correct Terms for Your Paper}

 Keywords. The author(s) should pick words that accurately describe

 information and builds the first part of the formatted document.
\maketitle

\section{Introduction}

% Evidence based
There is little debate that we care about education, so it is natural to want to help improve how learning happens and the educational systems that support learners. 
Exactly \textit{how} we can improve learning, however, comes under much debate.
Education and the learning sciences is a highly active area of research [cite or evidence - i.e. with X journals etc], with a diverse range of views \cite{} that can wax and wane over time \cite{stuff on phonics?}.
This is further complicated by the social, cultural and political interests and impacts of the decisions within educational systems \cite{political us book banning?}.
It seems no surprise then that simple solutions to `what works' would be attractive to those making decisions about how best to educate a wide range of learners. % rework, maybe include Hattie reference
This has led to calls for more `evidence-based' methods, and pushes towards `optimising learning'. 
There are excellent historical reasons for this: both terms have been incredibly productive in other fields first. 
Evidence-based Medicine has transformed the field and countless lives \cite{}, and optimisation has long been a cornerstone of Mathematics and more recently advances in Computer Science, Machine Learning, and Artificial Intelligence. 

This paper argues that there is a danger in blindly adopting these concepts in complex learning systems. 
Firstly we address the etymological baggage that comes with each term, and consider why it is prudent for education to think clearly and precisely about what underlying assumptions and practices.
Secondly we address some of the unintended consequences of their adoption, analysing unexpected results and ineffectual interventions in educational systems. This will require we take a systems view of the learning environment. % word this
Thirdly we explore alternative approaches that we feel should be more broadly adopted (i.e. complex systems approach, Cynefin and KK and AG's paper). 

\section{Etymological baggage}
% go through key terms: Evidence-based, optimisation, theory? and...
% 1. Where they came from, and why
% 2. The original meaning of the word, in the original context
% 3. Relevant baggage that the word has brought with it to the field of education, such as Epistimological, Mathematical, Cultural, Scientific

\subsection{Etymology of `Evidence-based education`}

The revolution of evidence-based medicine has been lauded and improved the lives of many \cite{}. 
As such the idea of having an `evidence-based' approach has spread into other fields, including education \cite{} \footnote{What exactly was before this? Bullshit based? Theory based? What exactly do we mean by this?}. 
The converse seems archaic and naive - why would we want to have educational practices that are not evidence-based?
% let's be precise about the *original* definition

% Is faster better? Towards what goal?

% Generalised statements / removed from context
\subsection{Optimisation}

\section{Systems, consequences, etc...}

\subsection{A systems view of the learning environment}

Learning takes place within a variety of systems: cognitive systems, classroom systems, social systems, educational systems. 
These systems are deeply entangled, overlapping each other and influencing each other. 


\section{A shift in perspective}




 The next two lines define the bibliography style to be used, and


\end{document}
\endinput
 End of file `sample-authordraft.tex'.



